---
title: "Seats not votes: why the Conservatives' pro-Brexit strategy was so successful at the 2019 election"
last_modified_at: 2020-05-17GMT:10:36-00:00
categories:
  - 2019 election
---

When tennis great Ivan Lendl was asked after his retirement why he had never won Wimbledon, he said “I never won 7 matches in a row”. It’s an informative perspective: yes, to win any tennis major you need strong fundamentals - world class groundstrokes, athleticism, tactical skill. But technically, to win Wimbledon, what you need to do is win 7 matches in a row.

It’s the same with elections. The fundamentals here are things like popular policies, an ability to persuade, an air of competence. But technically, to win, you need to win 326 seats - just over half of the 650 in the Commons.

A winning strategy for an election campaign needs to be based around this fact. And the Conservatives’ 2019 campaign was one of the best examples of this in recent memory.

2019, unusually, was a single-issue election, focused almost entirely on Brexit. And in the run up to the election, the country appeared pretty evenly divided over the issue, both in terms of [voting intention for a potential second referendum](https://whatukthinks.org/eu/questions/if-there-was-a-referendum-on-britains-membership-of-the-eu-how-would-you-vote-2/) and [support for the different parties on the two sides of the debate](https://www.opinium.co.uk/political-polling-25th-october-2019/): the Conservatives and the Brexit Party on the Leave side, and Labour, the Lib Dems, the Greens, the SNP and Plaid Cymru all supporting a second referendum or Remain. You might expect a party wanting to win the election to take a consensus approach, trying to appeal to voters on both sides of the debate. But the Conservatives campaigned on an aggressively pro-Brexit line - and if you examine how the contest looked at the individual seat level, that made perfect sense.

Chart 1 shows the electoral ‘battleground’ that the Conservatives were facing in terms of seats. Taking the 2017 election (where the Conservatives won 317 seats) as the starting point, it shows how big a ‘swing’ the Conservatives would need to take - or lose - each seat (‘swing’ being the average of the increase in Conservative vote share and decrease in its main challenger’s vote share in that seat). Each point represents a seat and is coloured according to its estimated Leave/Remain vote in the 2016 EU Referendum.

**Chart 1 - Electoral battleground for the Conservatives at the 2019 election (hover over points to see more information on each seat)**
<iframe id="igraph" scrolling="no" style="border:none;" seamless="seamless" src="https://sixhundredandfifty.github.io/charts/2020-05-17/chart1_2020_05_17.html" height="600" width="825"></iframe>

The chart demonstrates that a hard pro-Brexit line was likely to be the best strategy for winning seats because:

* **First**, there were way more Leave that Remain seats - 403 vs 229 in Great Britain (Northern Ireland is excluded from this analysis, as the Conservatives did not contest seats there). The Remain vote was simply concentrated in Scotland and a small number of mostly metropolitan areas in England and Wales.
* **Second**, there were tonnes of Leave seats within reach for the Conservatives - 39 of them within a 5 per cent ‘swing’ of being taken (the working definition of a ‘marginal’ seat). Look at Dudley North, Stoke on Trent North, Great Grimsby on the top of the 1%, 3% and 4% columns: each had a Leave vote over 70% and looked absolutely ripe to be won. In fact, if the they took just 1 percentage point of support from Labour in all the places that voted Leave, then the Conservatives would gain 11 seats; they only needed a net gain of 9 seats for a majority.
* Of course, on a pro-Leave ticket, they risked losing pro-Remain seats. But this is the **third** point: the Conservatives only held 78 pro-Remain seats overall, and only 22 of these were ‘marginal’. Look at Richmond Park, Putney, East Renfrewshire, each with a Remain vote over 70% - these stand out as some of the few gold dots in Conservative territory.
* And, **fourth**, even those seats which looked vulnerable mainly had Labour as the only credible challenger - and since 2017, Labour's support had fallen [for a host of reasons](https://yougov.co.uk/topics/politics/articles-reports/2019/12/23/their-own-words-why-voters-abandoned-labour) and the pro-Remain vote (which Labour had consolidated in 2017) had split off to the Lib Dems and others. This meant that - absent effective tactical voting on their opponents’ side - the Conservatives could probably count on not losing too many of their Remain seats.

How successful was the strategy? 

Let's look at vote share changes first.
* In England and Wales, very. Look at Chart 2, which shows the change in Labour and Conservative vote share in every seat in England and Wales, coloured by Leave vote. As expected, the Conservatives gained support in pro-Leave seats and lost support in pro-Remain seats, and the size of those changes were broadly in proportion to the size of the Leave or Remain vote. And as the Conservatives had hoped, Labour lost support everywhere: mostly to the Conservatives and Brexit Party in Leave seats, and to the Lib Dems in Remain seats (Chart 3). So that even in Remain seats where the Conservatives should have been vulnerable, Labour generally ended up losing more support than the Conservatives - in fact, of the 66 Remain seats which the Conservatives won in England and Wales in 2017, only 9 ‘swung’ towards Labour in 2019.

**Chart 2 - Change in Labour and Conservative vote shares in seats in England and Wales, 2017-2019**
<iframe id="igraph" scrolling="no" style="border:none;" seamless="seamless" src="https://sixhundredandfifty.github.io/charts/2020-05-17/chart2_2020_05_17.html" height="525" width="800"></iframe>

**Chart 3 - Average change in party vote share in different categories of seat, 2017-2019**
<iframe id="igraph" scrolling="no" style="border:none;" seamless="seamless" src="https://sixhundredandfifty.github.io/charts/2020-05-17/chart3_2020_05_17.html" height="525" width="900"></iframe>

* In Scotland, the SNP did better than Labour as the Remain challenger (Chart 4), picking up support across all seats won by the Conservatives in 2017, particularly in those with a large pro-Remain vote.

**Chart 4 - Change in SNP and Conservative vote shares in seats in Scotland, 2017-2019 (restricted to seats won by the Conservatives in 2017)**
<iframe id="igraph" scrolling="no" style="border:none;" seamless="seamless" src="https://sixhundredandfifty.github.io/charts/2020-05-17/chart4_2020_05_17.html" height="525" width="100%"></iframe>

Now let's look how this translated into seats. Chart 5 shows the battleground again, this time highlighting the seats that the Conservatives gained or lost in the 2019 election.

**Chart 5 - Electoral battleground for the Conservatives at the 2019 election, with seats gained and lost by the Conservatives highlighted in bold**
<iframe id="igraph" scrolling="no" style="border:none;" seamless="seamless" src="https://sixhundredandfifty.github.io/charts/2020-05-17/chart5_2020_05_17.html" height="600" width="825"></iframe>

As the chart shows:
* Dozens of pro-Brexit seats (all held by Labour) fell to the Conservatives - the marginal ones fell like dominoes, but since the Conservatives generally performed more strongly the higher the Leave vote (Chart 2 again) they also manage to pick up many ‘safer’ Labour seats, all the way out to Redcar where Labour had led by 22% in 2017.

* On the defensive, side of the 9 Remain seats that swung to Labour, only one did so by enough for the Conservatives to lose the seat (Putney). The Conservatives also lost a couple of seats to the Lib Dems (St Albans and Richmond Park), but as the Lib Dems were so far out of contention in most places, their increased vote share didn’t otherwise translate to seat gains. The splitting of the Remain vote in England and Wales was so helpful to the Conservatives that they even picked up a couple of marginal pro-Remain seats: Stroud, and the hugely pro-Remain Kensington.

* In Scotland, the SNP’s success allowed them to take 7 seats from the Conservatives. But this wasn’t enough to stop the Conservatives getting their majority given their big advances in pro-Leave seats.

* Overall the Conservatives gained 58 seats and lost just 10: a net increase of 48, taking them to 365 - well clear of the 326 needed.

Now, none of the above is to say that a Conservative victory was inevitable just because of electoral geography. If the Conservatives had run an ineffective campaign or been half-hearted in support of Leave, they might not have picked enough new Leave voters, or might have lost them to the Brexit Party. And the Conservatives were only able to adopt an aggressive pro-Leave platform because Labour support had fallen enough to reduce its threat in pro-Remain and moderate seats. 

But in the end, the Conservatives gained many more seats than they actually needed - if they had executed the strategy even half as well as they did, it’s still likely they would have won a majority. 

In the final tally, the pro-Leave parties (the Conservatives and the Brexit Party) secured 47% of the votes cast in Great Britain. Meanwhile, the pro-Remain parties ended up with 53%. But the Conservatives won the election very convincingly on a pro-Leave ticket. And this is the key point: to come up with a winning strategy, you can’t just focus on headline figures - you need to understand the rules of the game, and play them.

A final word on Ivan Lendl. He lost four grand slam finals in a row before he finally won his first at the French Open in 1984. Labour has now lost four elections in a row. In a future post, I’ll look at what Labour’s electoral battleground looks like after the 2019 election, and what options might be open to it heading into 2024.
